[2015) 9 S.C.R. 483
K.P. SINGH A
v.
STATE OF NCT OF DELHI
(Criminal Appeal No. 1264 OF 2015)
B
SEPTEMBER 28, 2015
[T.S. THAKUR AND V. GOPALA GOWDA, JJ.]
Sentence/Sentencing - Quantum of sentence -
Determination of- On facts, the appellant accepted bribe of C
Rs. 7001-- Court below concurrently convicted the appellant
for the offence punishable uls. 8 of the 1988Act-As regards
sentence, award of rigorous imprisonment for a period of two
years and a fine of Rs. 5, 0001-by the trial court was reduced
to one year besides a fine of Rs. 5, 0001-and default sentence
0
of imprisonment for a period of two months by the High Court
- On appeal, held: Per Gowda J: Having regard to the facts
and circumstances of the case, that the main accused-public
servant against whom the charges were leveled under the
1988 Act, was acquitted for want of evidence on record, and E
the said order has attained finality; and that pursuant to order
by this Court, the appellant surrendered to the Jail and has
served the sentence for more than 7. 5 months and has paid
the fine amount awarded by the courts below, to meet the
ends ofj ustice the period ofs entence awarded to the appellant F
reduced to the period already undergone by him- Thus, the
order of High Court is modified accordingly- Per Thakur J:
Determining the adequacy of sentence to be awarded in a
given case is not an easy task, just as evolving a uniform
sentencing policy is a tough call because the quantum of G
sentence depends upon a variety of factors including
mitigating circumstances peculiar to a given case - Since
the trial and appeal proceedings are pending for nearly 17
483
H
484 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2015] 9 S.C.R.
A years causing immense trauma, mental incarnation and
anguish to the appellant; that the bribe amount was just about
Rs. 7001-; and that the appellant has already undergone 7~
months against the statutory minimum of 6 months
imprisonment, the reduction of the sentence is correct -
B Prevention of Corruption Act. 1988 - s. 8.
B.G Goswami v. Delhi Administration (1974) 3 SCC 85:
1974 (1) SCR 222; Dologovinda Mohanty v. State ofOrissa
(1979) 4 SCC 557;M. W Mohiuddin v. State of Maharashtra
C (1995) 3 SCC 567: 1995 ( 2) SCR 864; Ghulam Din Buch
etc. etc. v. State of Jammu and Kashmir (1996) 9 SCC 239:
1996 ( 3 ) SCR 1121; State of Maharashtra v. Rashid
Babubhai Mulani (2006) 1 SCC 407: 2006 (1 ) SCR 189
;Bechaarbhai S. Prajapati v. State of Gujarat (2008) 11 SCC
D 163: 2008 (3) SCR 634; V.K. Verma v. CBI (2014) 3 SCC
485:2014 (1) SCR 1063 ;Gulmahmad Abdulla Dall v. State
ofGujarat2014 (4) Crimes 455 (SC)- referred to.
Case Law Reference
.E
1974 (1) SCR 222 referred to. Para 4
(1979) 4 sec 557 referred to. Para 5
1995 ( 2) SCR 864 referred to. Para 6
F
1996 ( 3) SCR 1121 referred to. Para 7
2006 (1 ) SCR 189 referred to. Para 8 ·
2008 (3) SCR 634 referred to. Para 9
G
2014 (1) SCR 1063 referred to. · Para 10
2014 (4) Crimes 455 (SC) referred to. Para 11
H CRIMINALAPPELLATE JURISDICTION: CriminalAppeal
No. 1264 of2015.
K.P. SINGH v. STATE OF NCT OF DELHI 485
From the Judgment and Order dated 31.10.2014 of the A
High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Criminal A. No. 758 of
2008.
Radha Shyam Jena, J. Samal for the Appellant.
B
K. L. Janjani, Shailender Saini, D.S. Mahra for the
Respondent.
The Orders of the Court were delivered by
c
V.GOPALA GOWDA, J. 1. Leave granted.
2. The present criminal appeal is directed against the
impugned judgment and order dated 31.10.2014 passed by
the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Crl. A. No. 758 of
2008, wherein it has affirmed the conviction against the D
appellant for the offence punishable under Section 8 of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter "the P. C. Act")
and reduced sentence awarded from 2 years to 1 year
retaining Rs.5000/- fine imposed with default sentence of 2
months after re-appreciation of evidence of the prosecution E
witnesses no.6, 9 and 13 and accepted their evidence as
cogent to prove the charge levelled against him in exercise
of its appellate jurisdiction. Various legal contentions have
been urged by the learned counsel on behalf of the appellant
before this Court questioning the correctness of the judgment F
and order reducing the sentence of imprisonment imposed
- upon him from 2 years to 1 year with fine amount of Rs.5,000/
- and in default sentence as mentioned above. This Court
vide its order dated 02.02.2015 has issued notice to the
respondent to re-consider the quantum of sentence subject G
to the condition that the appellant surrender to the Central
Jail, Tihar to undergo sentence and file proof thereof within
a week. Accordingly, he surrendered to the Central Jail, Tihar
on 04.02.2015 in case FIR No. 29of1997.
H
486 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2015] 9 S.C.R.
A 3. Mr. Radha Shyam Jena, learned counsel appearing
on behalf of the appellant contends that both the Special
Court and the High Court have erred in convicting the
appellant despite the fact that the main accused Ms. Manju
Mathur has been acquitted for the offence under Sections
B 7,8, 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the P.C. Act, on
appreciation of evidence on record and that the prosecution
failed to prove the guilt against her. She was acquitted from
the charges, which order has attained finality. The learned
counsel has further contended that the courts below have
C erred in recording a finding of guilt on the charge as against
the appellant despite the fact that there is no evidence on record
to prove the same. The learned counsel has further contended
that the High Court has erred in upholding the judgment and
order of the Special Judge and did not consider the essential
0
ingredients of Section 8 of the PC. Act, which are that the
accused should accept or agree to accept or even attempt to
obtain gratification from someone, the gratification is for
himself or for someone else and its motive or reward is to
E induce a public servant by corrupt or illegal means to do or
forebear to do any official act or to show favour or disfavour to
someone etc.
4. It is further contended by Mr. Radha S'hyam Jena,
F learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant that the
prosecution has failed to prove the involvement of someone
other than the appellant. Further, it is alternatively contended
by him that the appellant had undergone agony and trauma
since the litigation has been going on for the last 17 years.
G In this backdrop, the High Court ought to have imposed the
minimum sentence of 6 months as provided under Section 8
of the P.C. Act in exercise of its discretionary power. Hence
the present appeal urging various grounds.
H 5. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties
and have carefully examined the concurrent findings and
K.P. SINGH v. STATE OF NCT OF DELHI 487
[V.GOPALAGOWDA, J.]
. reasons recorded by the appellate court in its judgment after A
re-appreciation of evidence in exercise of its appellate
jurisdiction. The High Court after adverting to the evidence of
the prosecution witnesses has concurred with the findings of
fact on the charge framed against the appellant under Section
8 of the P.C. Act. While concurring with the findings of fact on B
conviction of the charge framed against the appellant, the
High Court has modified the sentence imposed upon him
from 2 years to 1 year with no change in the fine amount and
the default sentence as awarded by the learned Special Judge.
c
6. We have carefully examined the impugned judgment
and order passed by the High Court with a view to ascertain
whether the sentence imposed on the appellant by the High
Court can be modified to the minimum sentence of 6 months
as provided under the provisions of Section 8 of the P.C.Act. D
It is an undisputed fact that the main accused No. 2 has been
acquitted from the charges framed against her by the Special
Court. The learned Special Judge, on appreciation of evidence
on record has held that the prosecution had failed to prove
the charge against the accused No. 2, who is the public E
servant. Further, pursuant to our order dated 02.02.2015
the appellant surrendered to the Central Jail, Tihar on
04.02.2015 in FIR case No. 29 of 1997. He has served the
sentence for more than 7.5 months as per the certificate F
dated 6.9.2015 issued by the Deputy Superintendent,
Central Jail, Tihar and has paid the fine amount awarded by
the Special Court which fine amount as sentence is affirmed
by the High Court. Having regard to the facts and
circumstances of the case, particularly in the light of the fact G
thatthe main accused No. 2, against whom the charges we're
levelled under Sections 7, 8, 13 (1) (d) read with Section 13
(2) of the P.C. Act, was acquitted for want of evidence on
record, we are of the view that justice would be met if the
period of sentence already undergone by the appellant be H
488 SUPREMECOURTREPORTS [2015] 9 S.C.R.
A treated as the sentence to be imposed for the conviction on.
the charge framed against him. To that extent the impugned
order of sentence imposed by the High Court is modified
and we pass the following order:-
B This criminal appeal is partly allowed and we modify the
order impugned with regard to the period of sentence
already undergone by the appellant is treated as sentence
imposed upon him for the charge proved against him. To
this extent the impugned order of sentence of 1 year
C imposed by the High Court is modified. In view of the
above modified order of sentence, we direct the
Superintendent of Central Jail, lihar to release the
appellant forthwith from the custody, if he is not required
in any other criminal case.
D
T.S. THAKUR, J. 1. I have had the advantage of going
through the order proposed by my Esteemed Brother Gowda,
J. and find myself in complete agreement with the view taken
by His Lordship that the sentence awarded to the appellant
E deserves to be reduced to the period already undergone by
him. Not because the reasoning given in support of that view
is in any manner deficient, but only to buttress the conclusion
arrived at by his Lordship, I propose to add a few lines of my
own.
F
2. The facts to the extent relevant have been elucidated
in the order proposed by Gowda, J. It would, therefore, serve
no purpose to recapitulate the same over again. What is
important is that the principal accused has been acquitted of
G the charges framed against her while the courts below have
c6ncurrently convicted the appellant for the offences punishable
under Section 8 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. In
the present appeal we had issued notice limited to the question
of quantum of sentence that could be awarded to the
H appellant in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case.
K.P. SINGH v. STATE OF NCT OF DELHI 489
[T.S. THAKUR, J.]
The Trial Court had, as noticed by Gowda, J., awarded rigorous A
imprisonment for a period of two years and a fine of Rs. 5,000/
- to the appellant herein which has been in appeal reduced
by the High Court to one year besides a fine of Rs.5,000/
and a default sentence of imprisonment for a period of two
months. B
3. Determining the adequacy of sentence to be awarded
in a given case is not an easy task, just as evolving a uniform ·
sentencing policy is a tough call. That is because the quantum
of sentence that may be awarded depends upon a variety of C
factors including mitigating circumstances peculiar to a given
case. The Courts generally enjoy considerable amount of
discretion in the matter of determining the quantum of
sentence. In doing so, the courts are influenced in varying
degrees by the reformative, deterrent and punitive aspects D
of punishment, delay in the conclusion of the ~rial and legal
proceedings, the age of the accused, his physical/health
condition, the nature of the offence, the weapon used and in
the cases of illegal gratification the amount of bribe, loss of
job and family obligations of accused are also some of the E
considerations that weigh heavily with the Courts while
determining the sentence to be awarded. The Courts have
not attempted to exhaustively enumerate the considerations
that go into determination of the quantum of sentence nor F
have the Courts attempted to lay down the weight that each
one of these considerations carry. That is because any such
exercise is neither easy nor advisable given the myriad
situations in which the question may fall for determination.
Broadly speaking, the courts have recognised the factors G
mentioned earlier as being relevant to the question of
determining the sentence. Decisions of this Court on the
subject are a legion. Reference to some only should, however,
suffice.
H
4. In B.G. Goswami v. Delhi Administration (1974) 3 SCC
490 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2015) 9 S.C.R.
A 85, the accused was convicted under Section 5(2) read
with Section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1947 and under Section 161 of l.P.C and was sentenced to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 1 year and 4
months. On appeal, this Court while reducing the punishment
B to the period already undergone, laid down the general
principles that are to be borne in mind by the Courts while
determining the quantum of punishment. This Court observed:
"10. As already observ~d. the appellant's conviction
c
under Section 161, l.P.C. was rightly upheld by the High
Court and there is no cogent ground made out for our
interference with that conviction. The sentence of
imprisonment imposed by the High Court for both these
offences is 1 year and this sentence is to run concurrently.
D The only question which arises is that under Section 5(1 )(d)
read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption
Act the minimum sentence prescribed is rigorous
imprisonment for one year and there must also be
imposition of fine. The sentence of imprisonment can
E
be for a lesser period but in that event the Court has to
assign special reasons which must be recorded in writing.
In considering the special reasons the judicial discretion
of the Court is as wide as the demand of the cause of
substantial justice. Now the question of sentence is always
F
a difficult question, requiring as it does, proper ·
adjustment and balancing of various considerations which
weigh with a judicial mind in determining its appropri'ate
quantum in a given case. The main purpose ofJhe
sentence broadly stated is that the accused must realise
G
that he has committed an act which is not only harmful to
the society of which he forms an integral part but is also
harmful to his own future, both as an individual and as
a member of the society. Punishment is designed to
H protect society by deterring potential offenders as also by
K.P. SINGH v. STATE OF NCT OF DELHI 491
[T.S. THAKUR, J.]
preventing the guilty party from repeating the offence; it is . A
also designed to reform the offender and re-claim him
as a law abiding citizen for the good of the society as
a whole. Reformatory, deterrent and punitive aspects
of punishment thus play their due part in judicial thinking
while determining this question. In modern civilized B
societies, however, reformatory aspect is being given
somewhat greater importance. Too lenient as well as
too harsh sentences both lose their efficaciousness. One
does not deter and the other may frustrate thereby making
the offender a hardened criminal. In the present case, C
after weighing the considerations already noticed by us
and the fact that to send the appellant back to jail now
after 7 years of the agony and harassment of these
proceedings when he is also going to lose his job and to
0
earn a living for himself and for his family members and
for those dependent on him, we feel that it would meetthe
ends of justice if we reduce the sentence of
imprisonment to that already undergone but increase
the sentence of fine from Rs. 200/- to Rs. 400/-. Period E
of imprisonment in case of default will remain the same."
5. In Dologovinda Mohantyv. State of Orissa (1979) 4
sec
557, this Court upon considering the negligible amount
of Rs. 138/- alleged to have been received by the accused F
. as illegal gratification, took a lenient view by reducing the
sentence of the accused from four months rigorous
imprisonment to the period already undergone. The following
passage is apposite:
" .... It, however, appears that the entire money which was G
said to have been embezzled by the appellant was
recovered by the government by deducting the entire
amount from the salary of the appellant. It also appears
from the statement of the accused under Section 342 H
that in view of his domestic circumstances he was
492 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2015] 9 S.C.R.
A mentally disturbed. Having regard to these special
circumstances and further having regard to the facts that
the sum embezzled is only Rs. 138/-we feel that it would
not be proper to send the appellant back to jail. The
appellant has already undergone about a week's
B imprisonment. For these reasons, therefore, we reduce
the sentence to the period already served and reduce
the fine from Rs. 1,000/-to Rs. 500/- in default one month's
rigorous imprisonment. Out of the fine, if deposited
already, Rs. 500/-may be refunded to the appellant. With
c
this modification the appeal is dismissed."
6. In light of the long delay in the conclusion of the legal
proceedings and the consequential agony and incarceration
undergone by the appellant, this Court in M.W. Mohiuddin v.
D State of Maharashtra (1995) 3 SCC 567 reduced the
sentence of six months imposed on the accused by the trial
court to the period already undergone:
"10. Now coming to the question of sentence, the offence
E took place in theyear1981.All these years the appellant
has undergone the agony of criminal proceedings until
now and he has also lost his job and has a large family to
support. It is also stated that he has become sick and
infirm. He has been in jail for some time. For all these
F special reasons, while confirming the conviction of the
appellant, we reduce the sentence of imprisonment to
the period already undergone. However, we confirm
the sentence of fine with default clause. Accordingly,
subject to the modification of sentence of imprisonment,
G
the appeal is dismissed."
7. To the same effect is the decision of this Court in
Ghulam Din Buch etc. etc. v. State of Jammu and Kashmir
sec
( 1996) 9 239 wherein after considering the long delay
H in the legal proceedings, this Court reduced the punishment
K.P. SINGH v. STATE OF NCT OF DELHI 493
(T.S. THAKUR, J.]
of the accused to two months rigorous imprisonment for A
offences punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1947 and the Ranbir Penal Code. This Court said:
"28. According to us, it would be too harsh to award
even the minimum punishment at this length of time B
keeping in view the hardship already undergone and
the amount which the State had ultimately to lose because
of the conspiracy - the same being a sum of Rs.
1,62, 117.89. As about two decades have passed since
the commission of the offence and as during the C
interregnum the appellants had undoubtedly suffered in
body and mind, according to us, it is a fit case where the
proviso to Sub-section (2) of Section 5 oftheAct should
be invoked which states that for special reasons
recorded in writing, the court may refrain from imposing a D
sentence of imprisonment or impose a sentence of
imprisonment of less than ·one year. Though the proviso
permits not to impose a sentence of imprisonment at all
and confine the sentence to fine only, we do not think if
present is a case where the punishment to be awarded E
should be only fine, as any softness in this regard could
produce an undesirable result, namely, encouragement
to adoption of corrupt means by public servants which
has indeed to be checked, and not allow to be F
encouraged. Keeping in view all the attending
circumstances, we are of the view that a sentence of RI
for two months would be adequate sentence, apart from
the fine of Rs. 15,000. On failure to pay the fine, each of
the appellants would suffer imprisonment for two months." G
8. So also, in the case of State of Maharashtra v. Rashid
Babubhai Mulani (2006) 1 SCC 407, the accused had
allegedly obtained illegal gratification to the tune of Rs. 300/
- for which the trial Court had convicted the accused under H
Section 161 of the l.P.C. and for an offence punishable under
494 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2015] 9 S.C.R.
A Section 5(2) read with Section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 194 7 and sentenced him to rigorous
imprisonment for a period of one year. This Court reduced
the sentence to four months after considering the b.ribe
amount and the long delay. The following observations are, in
B this regard, relevant:
"6. In regard to sentence, we find that the incident
occurred about 19 years ago. The matter was pending
for about 3 years before the Special Judge, and about
c
8 years before the High Court and, thereafter, for 8 years
before this Court. The accused was hardly 32 years old
when the incident occurred and now more than 50 years
old. The accused was a Talathi coming from a poor
background with a family to support. In the
D circumstances, while restoring the conviction, we reduce
the sentence from one year to four months both under
Section 161 IPC and Section 5(2) read with Section
5(1)(d) of the Act. Both the sentences to run concurrently.
The accused, who is on bail, shall surrender forthwith to
E
serve out the sentence."
9. So also, in the case of Bechaarbhai S. Prajapati v. State
of Gujarat (2008) 11 SCC 163, this Court reduced the sentence
of one year imprisonment imposed on the accused for the
F offences under Section 161 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
and Section 7(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
The Court, in the following words, held that the delay and
the sentence undergone by the accused were mitigating
factors in determining the quantum of sentence:
G
"8. The alternative submission relates to the harshness
of sentence. The occurrence took place nearly seven
years back. It is stated that the appellant has suffered
custody for more than six months. Taking into account
H all these aspects, we feel interest of justice would be best
K.P. SINGH v. STATE OF NCT OF DELHI 495
[T.S. THAKUR, J.]
served if the sentence is reduced to the period undergone, A
while maintaining the-conviction. It is to be noted that the
minimum sentence prescribed under Section 7(2) of the
Act is six months."
10. In the recent decision of this Court in V.K. Verma v. B
sec
CBI (2014) 3 485, the accused was charged under
Section 161 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and Section
5( 1) ( d) read with 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1947 for demand and acceptance of a bribe of Rs.265/- and
was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period C
of one and a half years for each of the offences. This Court,
while hearing his appeal limited the quantum of punishment
to the period already undergone. The following words are
seminal to the issue at hand:
D
"10. In imposing a punishment, the concern of the court is
with the nature of the act viewed as a crime or breach of
the law. The maximum sentence or fine provided in law
is an indicator on the gravity of the act. Having regard
to the nature and mode of commission of an offence by a E
person and the mitigating factors, if any, the court has to
take a decision as to whether the charge established
falls short of the maximum gravity indicated in the statute,
and if so, to what extent.
F
11. The long delay before the courts in taking a final
decision with regard to the guilt or otherwise o~ the
accused is one of the mitigating factors for the superior
courts to take into consideration while taking a decision
on the quantum of sentence.... G
xxx xxx xxx
15. The Appellant is now aged 76. We are informed that
he is otherwise not keeping in good health, having had H
also cardio vascular .problems. The offence is of the
496 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2015) 9 S.C.R.
A year 1984. It is almostthree decades now. The accused
has already undergone physical incarceration for three
months and mental incarceration for about thirty years.
Whether at this age and stage, it would not be
economically wasteful, and a liability to the State to keep
B
theAppellant in prison, is the question we have to address.
Having given thoughtful consideration to all the aspects
of the matter, we are of the view that the facts mentioned
above would certainly be special reasons for reducing
the substantive sentence but enhancing the fine, while
c
maintaining the conviction."
11. Similarly, in Gulmahmad Abdulla Dall v. State of
Gujarat 2014 (4) Crimes 455 (SC), the appellant was
sentenced by the trial court to undergo rigorous imprisonment
D for a period of one year and a fine of Rs. 2500/- for the offence
punishable under Sections 161 and 165(A) of Indian Penal
Code and under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1947. While hearing an appeal on the quantum of
sentence, this Court reduced the sentence of the accused to
E the period already undergone on the ground of protracted
legal proceedings. The following passage is, in this regard,
apposite:
"7. The incident, in question, took place as back as on
F 29/6/1987. Almost 27 years have passed by. All these
years, the Appellants must have suffered tremendous
mental trauma and anguish. The Appellants have lost their
jobs and all retiral benefits. The Appellant - Jujarsinh is,
as of today, about 76 years old. We are informed by
G
learned Counsel for the Appellant -GulmahmadAbdulla
Dall that Gulmahmad is suffering from gangrene and
has undergone surgery. Both the Appellants are in jail.
We ,are informed by learned Counsel for the Appellants
that the Appellants have undergcne about more than two
H
months imprisonment.
K.P. SINGH v. STATE OF NCT OF DELHI 497
[T.S. THAKUR, J.]
8. In the peculiar circumstances of the case, therefore, A
we are of the opinion that the sentence undergone by
them should be treated as substantive sentence for the
offences for which they are convicted and fine imposed on
them needs to be enhanced".
B
12. Given the fact that the trial and appeal proceedings
have in the case at hand continued for nearly 17 years by now
causing immense trauma, mental incarnation and anguish to
the appellant and also given the fact that the bribe amount
was just about Rs. 700/-and that the appellant has already C
undergone 711:! months against the statutory minimum of 6
months imprisonment, the reduction of the sentence as
proposed by my esteemed Brother appears to be perfectly in
order. I, therefore, concur with the view taken by His Lordship.
NidhiJain Appeal partly allowed.
